Too Much Happening, Filtering the Overload
==========================================

Tonight I was drifting through `Upcoming <http://upcoming.yahoo.com/>`_
to see what's happening in my area. Turns out the first page of 50 some
events only covered today…. and its a ‘boring' Wednesday. As I flipped
through page after page, eventually getting all the way up to this
upcoming Sunday… it occurred to me that there is way way too much
happening within a mere 30 miles of me.

Of course, being a geek I've been thinking about ways to try and narrow
down this list so I can actually get a **useful** list for what I'd
prolly be interested in for the next 45 days. There's just no way I can
look through 1200 events to see what's going on for the next month, and
I like to plan ahead.

A few things I think would help to begin with would be keyword
filtering, of course the next step that requires would be some way to
build a useful keylist of what should be flagged for my perusal. Trying
to generate a full list of every keyword I might be interested in is
going to be pretty tough, though I finally thought of the one
application I have which could yield the best list of keywords to filter
on… `Delicious Library <http://www.delicious-monster.com/>`_.

It already knows the vast majority of books I own, and all my DVD's.
That's not a bad starting point, toss in all the music I've bought from
scouring all the id3 tags on my digital music and that'll cover my
music. I really need a way to pull all my previously watched, and
upcoming movies from Netflix, in addition to mining all the data of who
was in each flick (IMDB should have that). After which I should have a
decent set of keywords to ensure I don't miss either some special
premier with an actor I might like, or a comedian doing standup.

Is there anything like this already that I just haven't found? Clearly,
I'd want to keep this massive keyword list personal, so the software to
pull from upcoming would narrow down the result set locally. I'm still a
bit too privacy obsessed to consider putting such a massive amount of
information into a single vendors hands. :)


.. author:: default
.. categories:: Thoughts, Rants
.. comments::
   :url: http://be.groovie.org/post/296343770/too-much-happening-filtering-the-overload